KubeRay Istio mTLS and L7 observability Guide (#44801)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/k8s-ecosystem/istio.md

* Secure network traffic in a Kubernetes cluster with TLS encryption.
* Automatic metrics, logs, and traces for all traffic within a cluster.

See the [Istio documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/) to learn more.

## Step 0: Create a Kind cluster

```bash
kind create cluster
```

## Step 1: Install Istio

```bash
# Download istioctl and manifests
export ISTIO_VERSION=1.21.1
curl -L https://istio.io/downloadIstio | sh -
cd istio-1.21.1
export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH

# Install Istio with:
#   1. 100% trace sampling for demo purpose
#   2. "sanitize_te" disabled for proper grpc interception. This is required by Istio 1.21.0 (https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/49685)
#   3. TLS 1.3 enabled
istioctl install -y -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  meshConfig:
    defaultConfig:
      tracing:
        sampling: 100
      runtimeValues:
        envoy.reloadable_features.sanitize_te: "false"
    meshMTLS:
      minProtocolVersion: TLSV1_3
EOF

> # Install Istio addons, including kiali dashboard and jaeger dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Install Istio addons, including the Kiali and Jaeger dashboards.
```

kubectl apply -f samples/addons

> # Enable istio sidecar auto injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Enable the Istio sidecar auto injection.
```

kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
```

See [Istio Getting Started](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/) for more details on installing Istio.

## Step 2: Install the KubeRay operator

Follow [Deploy a KubeRay operator](kuberay-operator-deploy) to install the latest stable KubeRay operator from the Helm repository.

> ## Step 3: Optional: Enable Istio mTLS STRICT mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: (Optional) Enable Istio mTLS STRICT mode
```

> This is an optional step to enable Istio mTLS in STRICT mode which provides the best security of service mesh by rejecting all undefined traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This optional step enables Istio mTLS in STRICT mode, which provides the best security of service mesh by rejecting all undefined traffic.
```

> In this mode, we must disable the KubeRay init container injection by setting `ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION=false` on the KubeRay controller. This is necessary because the init container starts before the istio-proxy, resulting in the rejection of all its network traffic in STRICT mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this mode, you must disable the KubeRay init container injection by setting `ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION=false` on the KubeRay controller. This setting is necessary because the init container starts before the `istio-proxy`, resulting in the rejection of all of its network traffic in STRICT mode.
```

```bash

> # Set ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION=false on the KubeRay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION=false on the KubeRay operator.
```

helm upgrade kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --version 1.1.0 \
  --set env\[0\].name=ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION \
  --set-string env\[0\].value=false

> # Apply mTLS STRICT mode on Istio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Apply mTLS STRICT mode on Istio.
```

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: PeerAuthentication
metadata:
  name: "default"
  namespace: "default"
spec:
  mtls:
    mode: STRICT
EOF
```

> See [Istio Mutual TLS Migration](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authentication/mtls-migration/) for more information about the STRICT mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Istio Mutual TLS Migration](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/security/authentication/mtls-migration/) for more information about STRICT mode.
```

## Step 4: Apply a Headless service for the upcoming RayCluster

> In order to let Istio learn the L7 information of the upcoming RayCluster, we must apply a Headless service for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To let Istio learn the L7 information of the upcoming RayCluster, you must apply a Headless service for it.
```

  namespace: default
spec:
  clusterIP: None
  selector:
    ray.io/cluster: raycluster-istio
  publishNotReadyAddresses: true
  ports:
  - name: node-manager-port
    port: 6380
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: object-manager-port
    port: 6381
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: runtime-env-agent-port
    port: 6382
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: dashboard-agent-grpc-port
    port: 6383
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: dashboard-agent-listen-port
    port: 52365
    appProtocol: http
  - name: metrics-export-port
    port: 8080
    appProtocol: http
  - name: p10002
    port: 10002
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10003
    port: 10003
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10004
    port: 10004
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10005
    port: 10005
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10006
    port: 10006
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10007
    port: 10007
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10008
    port: 10008
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10009
    port: 10009
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10010
    port: 10010
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10011
    port: 10011
    appProtocol: grpc
  - name: p10012
    port: 10012
    appProtocol: grpc
EOF
```

> Note that this Headless Service manifest MUST list ALL the ports used by Ray explicitly, including ALL worker ports. See [Configuring Ray](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/configure.html#all-nodes) for more details on the ports required by Ray.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this Headless Service manifest _must_ list _all_ the ports used by Ray explicitly, including _all_ worker ports. See [Configuring Ray](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/ray-core/configure.html#all-nodes) for more details on the ports required by Ray.
```

:::{note}

> Kubernetes Service doesn't support specifying ports in ranges. We MUST set them one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes Service doesn't support specifying ports in ranges. You _must_ set them one by one.
```

:::

:::{warning}

> The default Ray worker port range, from 10002 to 19999, is too large to specify in the service manifest and can cause memory issues in Kubernetes. It is recommended to set a smaller `max-worker-port` to work with Istio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default Ray worker port range, from 10002 to 19999, is too large to specify in the service manifest and can cause memory issues in Kubernetes. Set a smaller `max-worker-port` to work with Istio.
```

:::

## Step 4: Create the RayCluster

> The upcoming RayCluster MUST use exactly the same ports listed in the previous Headless Service, including the `max-worker-port`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upcoming RayCluster _must_ use exactly the same ports listed in the previous Headless Service, including the `max-worker-port`.
```

> In addition, the `node-ip-address` MUST be set to the Pod FQDN of the Headless Service to enable Istio L7 observability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the `node-ip-address` _must_ be set to the Pod FQDN of the Headless Service to enable Istio L7 observability.
```

      template:
        spec:
          containers:
          - name: ray-head
            image: rayproject/ray:2.10.0
    workerGroupSpecs:
      - replicas: 1
        minReplicas: 1
        maxReplicas: 1
        groupName: small-group
        rayStartParams:
          num-cpus: '1'
          node-manager-port: '6380'
          object-manager-port: '6381'
          runtime-env-agent-port: '6382'
          dashboard-agent-grpc-port: '6383'
          dashboard-agent-listen-port: '52365'
          metrics-export-port: '8080'
          max-worker-port: '10012'
          node-ip-address: \$(hostname -I | tr -d ' ' | sed 's/\./-/g').raycluster-istio-headless-svc.default.svc.cluster.local
        template:
          spec:
            containers:
            - name: ray-worker
              image: rayproject/ray:2.10.0
  EOF
  ```
  :::

  ::::

:::{note}
The Pod FQDN of the Headless service should be in the format of `pod-ipv4-address.service.namespace.svc.zone.` or the format of `pod-hostname.service.namespace.svc.zone.` depending on your implementation of the [Kubernetes DNS specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/dns/blob/master/docs/specification.md).
:::

> ## Step 5: Run Ray application to generate traffic for later visualization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Run your Ray app to generate traffic
```

> After the RayCluster is ready, use the following script to generate internal traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the RayCluster is ready, use the following script to generate internal traffic for visualization.
```

```bash
export HEAD_POD=$(kubectl get pods --selector=ray.io/node-type=head -o custom-columns=POD:metadata.name --no-headers)
kubectl exec -it $HEAD_POD -- python -c "import ray; ray.get([ray.remote(lambda x: print(x)).remote(i) for i in range(5000)])"
```

## Step 6: Verify the auto mTLS and L7 observability

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Run the following command to start the Kiali dashboard:
```

```bash
istioctl dashboard kiali
```

> Go to http://localhost:20001/kiali/console/namespaces/default/workloads/raycluster-istio?duration=60&refresh=60000&tab=info

Reviewer: Should this be a link?

> Go to http://localhost:20001/kiali/console/namespaces/default/workloads/raycluster-istio?duration=60&refresh=60000&tab=info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the `raycluster-istio` workload at:  http://localhost:20001/kiali/console/namespaces/default/workloads/raycluster-istio?duration=60&refresh=60000&tab=info
```

![Istio Kiali Overview](../images/istio-kiali-1.png)

> Go to the `Traffic` tab. You can see that all traffic are protected by mTLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the `Traffic` tab. You can see that mTLS protects all of the traffic.
```

![Istio Kiali Traffic](../images/istio-kiali-2.png)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Run the following command to start the Jaeger dashboard:
```

```bash
istioctl dashboard jaeger
```

Go to http://localhost:16686/jaeger/search?limit=1000&lookback=1h&maxDuration&minDuration&service=raycluster-istio.default

![Istio Jaeger Overview](../images/istio-jaeger-1.png)

> You can click on any trace of the internal grpc calls and view their detail, such as grpc.path, and status code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can click on any trace of the internal gRPC calls and view their details, such as `grpc.path` and `status code`.
```

![Istio Jaeger Trace](../images/istio-jaeger-2.png)

## Step 7: Clean up

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Run the following command to delete your cluster.
```

(kuberay-istio)=
# Enable mTLS and L7 observability of traffic in RayCluster with Istio

This guide demonstrates the integration of KubeRay and Istio for enabling mTLS and L7 observability of traffic inside a RayCluster on a local Kind cluster.

## Istio

[Istio](https://istio.io/) is an open source service mesh that provides a uniform and more efficient way to secure, connect, and monitor services. Its powerful control plane brings vital features, including:

> * Secure service-to-service communication in a cluster with TLS encryption.

Author: In the scenario of Istio in Kubernetes, the term service refers to k8s service and the term cluster refers to k8s cluster.

> * Secure service-to-service communication in a cluster with TLS encryption.

Author: These terms may look misleading in the context of Ray. I have removed them.

> * Secure service-to-service communication in a cluster with TLS encryption.

Reviewer 2: I just realized that the head also communicates with worker Pods via a headless service. That's why it is 'service-to-service.

## Step 0: Create a Kind cluster

```bash
kind create cluster
```

## Step 1: Install Istio

```bash
# Download istioctl and manifests
export ISTIO_VERSION=1.21.1
curl -L https://istio.io/downloadIstio | sh -
cd istio-1.21.1
export PATH=$PWD/bin:$PATH

# Install Istio with:
#   1. 100% trace sampling for demo purpose
#   2. "sanitize_te" disabled for proper grpc interception
#   3. TLS 1.3 enabled
istioctl install -y -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  meshConfig:
    defaultConfig:
      tracing:
        sampling: 100
      runtimeValues:
        envoy.reloadable_features.sanitize_te: "false"
    meshMTLS:
      minProtocolVersion: TLSV1_3
EOF

# Install Istio addons, including kiali dashboard and jaeger dashboard
kubectl apply -f samples/addons
# Enable istio sidecar auto injection
kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
```

See [Istio Getting Started](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/) for more details on installing Istio.

## Step 2: Install the KubeRay operator

Follow [Deploy a KubeRay operator](kuberay-operator-deploy) to install the latest stable KubeRay operator from the Helm repository:

> ```bash

Author: Done

helm repo add kuberay https://ray-project.github.io/kuberay-helm/
helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --version 1.1.0
```

## Step 3: Optional: Enable Istio mTLS STRICT mode

This is an optional step to enable Istio mTLS in STRICT mode which provides the best security of service mesh by rejecting all undefined traffic.

> In this mode, we must set ENABLE_INIT_CONTAINER_INJECTION=false on the KubeRay controller.

Author: Sure. Added.
